Esther Lee & Skylar Huang Pd. 8

Idea: We will simulate the rotation of ionized plasma particles around magnetic field lines in a fusion reactor, as well as the energy created by their fusion reactions. Our animation will include two plasma particles (representing the average motion of all the particles in the fusion reactor) moving along multiple magnetic field lines. The collisions resulting from the two rotating particles will charge up a city with its building’s windows glowing brighter, proportional to the amount of energy generated.

Physics: The plasma particles will be moving in a helix structure following the Lorentz force equation F=q(vB). Since the particles in the fusion reactor are moving rapidly, we will use the Runge-Kutta method to update positions and velocities instead of Euler’s method as a form of linearization for our model. We will estimate the frequency of hydrogen nuclei collisions using the acceleration of the particles due to the electromagnetic field. The rate of reaction will be estimated using the core equation R12=n1n2 , where n1 and n2 are the particle densities, which are then multiplied by the average product of fusion cross section and relative velocity. Thus, increasing plasma density or particle speed will increase the probability of having collisions. The released energy will be calculated using E=mc2 and after summing up the energy from each collision, we will compare it against a preset threshold required to power the city we are animating. We plan to reference the Lawson Criterion nET310-21keV  s/m3. If the reactor’s parameters don’t meet this criterion, the reactor will shut down. 

User Interface: Our simulation will also have interactive features that the user can adjust, such as the number of magnets surrounding the reactor (to increase/decrease the magnetic field strength), the radius of the cross-sectional area of the reactor to adjust the collision rate, and the amount of particles injected into the reactor. If we have time, we can add other parameters like the mass of the particles (which depends on the elements used in the reaction), the effect of sputtering from the reaction (which causes the reactor to shut down), the velocity of the electrons (in opposite direction to the nuclei), or giving the particles an initial momentum. 

The end goal of the simulation is to reach the energy threshold to power a city. By adjusting the parameters specified above, we can calculate the total energy generated from the reactor and see if it meets the threshold. We will also have graphs that depict dependent variables such as the average velocity and acceleration of the particles with respect to time (as the user changes independent variables on the interface). 